Add trading framework concepts page (#113)
vegaprotocol/documentation: docs/concepts/trading-framework/data-sources.md

---
sidebar_position: 8
title: Data sources
hide_title: false
---

> Data sources, which come from oracles, are essential to markets created on Vega.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data sources, which include oracles and data originating on the Vega network, are essential to markets created on Vega.
```

> Market settlement, risk models, and other features require a supplied price, or other data, which must come from somewhere, usually completely external to Vega. Specifically for settlement values, Vega requires external data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Market settlement, risk models, and other features require a supplied price, or other data, which must come from somewhere, usually completely external to Vega. Specifically for settlement values, Vega currently requires external data.
```

> Vega APIs and protocol capabilities support a wide range of data sourcing styles and standards, and Vega will not integrate directly with specific oracles / data providers at the protocol level. This framework is flexible to make it easy to create and combine oracles, and therefore to design markets on almost anything.

Reviewer: This is more aspirational than current 🥹

Reviewer 2: Ah - yeah I can see that. I'll rework it to be clear what's true now and what's expected to be true  in the future :)

> Vega APIs and protocol capabilities support a wide range of data sourcing styles and standards, and Vega will not integrate directly with specific oracles / data providers at the protocol level. This framework is flexible to make it easy to create and combine oracles, and therefore to design markets on almost anything.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The types of data sources that Vega can accept in the current implementation is limited to those listed below.

However, the APIs and protocol are expected to support a wider range of data source standards in the future. 
The framework is designed to be flexible to make it easy to create and combine oracles, and therefore to design markets on almost anything, and the software will grow to fulfil that goal. 
```

A filtered data source must specify:

* Data: Another data source that defines the input data
* Filters: A list of at least one filter to apply to the data

A filter specifies a condition to apply to the data. If all filters match, the data is emitted. The filter types are defined in the Operator field of a market proposal.

Filter condition types:

* Equals: Data must exactly match the filter, i.e. Equals key = ticker, value = TSLA
* Greater / greater or equal to: Data can be greater than or equal to the filter, i.e. GreaterOrEqual key = timestamp, value = 2021-12-31T23:59:59
* Less / less or equal to: Data can be less than or equal to the filter, i.e. LessOrEqual key = timestamp, value = 2021-12-31T23:59:59

## Internal data source
An internal data source provides information that comes from within Vega, rather than an external source. They are defined and used in the same way as external data sources, but are triggered by the relevant event in protocol rather than by an incoming transaction.

There is currently one type of data that can come from internal data sources: time-triggered.

> ### Internal data source: Time triggered

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Internal data source: Timestamp
```
